Key Lime Pie

Why This Recipe Works

Some of us have been served Key lime pie in restaurants and found it disappointing, usually harsh and artificial tasting. We wanted a recipe for classic Key lime pie with a fresh flavor and silky filling. Traditional Key lime pie is usually not baked; instead, the combination of egg yolks, lime juice, and sweetened and condense milk firms up when chilled because the juice's acidity causes the proteins in the eggs and milk to bind.

Although we had suspected that the sweetened and condensed milk was the party guilty of giving Key lime pies their "off" flavor, we found that the real culprit was the lime juice&mdash;bottled, reconstituted lime juice, that is. When we substituted the juice and zest from fresh limes, the pie becaome an entirely different experience: pungent and refreshing, cool and yet creamy, and very satisfying. We also discovered that while the pie filling will set without baking (most recipes call only for mixing and then chilling), it set much more nicely after being baked for only 15 minutes. We tried other, more dramatic, departures from the "classic" recipe&mdash;folding in egg whites, substituting heavy cream for condensed milk&dash;but they didn't work. Just two seemingly minor adjustments to the recipe made all the diffence in the world.

Key Lime Pie
Serves 8

Despite this pie's name, we found that tasters could not tell the difference between pies made with regular supermarket limes (called Persian limes) and true Key limes. Since Persian limes are easier to find and juice, we recommend them. The timing here is different from other pies; you need to make the fillig first, then prepare the crust.

Pie
4 large egg yolks
4 teaspoons grated zest plus 1/2 cup juice from 3 or 4 limes (see note)
1 (14-ounce) can sweetened condensed milk
1 recipe Graham Cracker Crust

Topping (Optional)
1 cup heavy cream, chilled
1/4 cup (1 ounce) confectioners' sugar

For the Pie:

1. Whisk the egg yolks and lime zest together in a medium bowl until the mixture has a light green tint, about 2 minutes. Whisk in the condensed milk until smooth, then whisk in the lime juice. Cover the mixture and set aside at room temperature until thickened, about 30 minutes.

2. Meanwhile, prepare and bake the crust. Transfer the pie plate to a wire rack and leave the oven at 325 degrees. (The crust must still be warm when the filling is added.)

3. Pour the thickened filling into the warm pie crust. Bake the pie until the center is firm but jiggles slightly when shaken, 15 to 20 minutes. Let the pie cool slightly on a wire rack, about 1 hour, then cover loosely with plastic wrap and refrigerate until the filling is chilled and set, about 3 hours.

For the Topping (If Using):

4. Before serving, whip the cream and sugar together in a large bowl with an electric mixer on medium-low speed until frothy, about 1 minute. Increase the mixer speed to high and continue to whip until the cream forms soft peaks, 1 to 3 minutes. Spread the whipped cream over the top of the pie and serve.
